Add WG AI Integration (#8519)
kubernetes/community: wg-ai-integration/charter.md

# WG AI Integration Charter

This charter adheres to the conventions described in the [Kubernetes Charter
README] and uses the Roles and Organization Management outlined in
[wg-governance].

## Scope

The AI Integration Working Group focuses on enabling seamless integration of
AI/ML control planes with Kubernetes, as well as providing standardized
patterns for deploying, managing, and operating AI applications at scale

> on Kubernetes.

Reviewer: [wg-serving](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/wg-serving/charter.md#scope) is `specifically focusing on hardware-accelerated AI/ML inference`, so that's that fine line between these two.

The Working Group will provide a forum for a broad engineering community to
give feedback to the project on challenges encountered when integrating with
Kubernetes.

This addresses a broad need with many end-users deploying complex AI systems,
AI/ML platform providers, Kubernetes distributions, and developers of
distributed AI applications facing these integration challenges. Standardizing
solutions in this space benefits the entire Kubernetes ecosystem. Adjacent
ecosystems could link to the outputs of this WG as a trusted vehicle for
supporting AI integrations with Kubernetes.

### In scope

* Develop a shared community point of view and associated best practices
enabling AI agent (or multi-agent) systems to integrate with Kubernetes.

* Provide a forum for intersecting code experimentation in AI integration
space (to be provided externally of Kubernetes via LF/CNCF) and discussion
with the existing Kubernetes community.

* Recommend an appropriate go forward governance model for AI Integrations

> with the Kubernetes project (existing SIGs, new SIG, or totally external

Reviewer 2: Similar comment to the one I did in https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/8515/files#r2216446151

I don't think the references to existing SIGs or new SIGs are related to the proposal and are tendentious and irrelevant , we should rephrase this as 
```suggestion
* Recommend an appropriate go forward governance model for AI Integrations
with the Kubernetes project or totally external
to Kubernetes.
```

it is implicit that it must be owned by a SIG if is within the kubernetes project

to Kubernetes).

* Identify appropriate auth(z) patterns for AI connector identities, its
 closest caller, and Kubernetes RBAC.

>  closest caller, and Kubernetes RBAC.

Reviewer 3: Typo. Same as previous line.

Author: Fixed, thanks!

building and managing connectors of kubernetes API with AI agent ecosystems.

### Out of Scope

* Development of AI/ML frameworks or applications
* General-purpose workload management not specific to AI/ML
* Deploying inference workloads on Kubernetes (which is covered by WG Serving)
* Manage accelerator devices (which is covered by WG Device Management)

## Deliverables

* The WG will provide space for collaboration and experimentation. If/when any
 solid ideas emerge that require changes to Kubernetes (for example, updates
 to kubectl for AI consumption), the WG will facilitate and coordinate the delivery
 of KEPs and their implementations by the participating SIGs.
* Interim artifacts will include documents capturing use cases, requirements,
 integration architecture designs, and AI application communication patterns.
* Establish best practices document for AI tool integration with Kubernetes and
 a clear recommendation if/what set of reference tools may best fit in
 Kubernetes project itself informed from data driven experimentation with
 appropriate governance model.

## Stakeholders

* SIG Architecture
* SIG API Machinery
* SIG Apps
* SIG Auth
* SIG CLI

> * SIG Network

Reviewer 4: The big areas where SIG Network has been hearing about / dealing with AI are DRA (aka "Manage accelerator devices", which is marked out-of-scope) and inference-related Gateway features (which would seem to fall under "Deploying inference workloads", which is also marked out-of-scope, and which is the subject of [a *different* AI WG proposal](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/XC_8qAyk8W0) anyway). None of the things you list as "In scope" above seem like they need input from SIG Network.

@kubernetes/sig-network-leads ?

Reviewer 2: I defer to Dan, I really not very familiar with these protocols you mention but it seems to me both WG-Serving and the AI-GW proposal Dan is indicating will overlap on that area

Author: Thanks for the review. I added an item for this in the charter.

Reviewer: So do we still need sig-network here or not? And where is the updated point, I can't find it :sweat_smile:

Reviewer 5: I will ignore the first part of your response. I believe @shaneutt had a distinction betwen the current AI related working groups and the proposed. The question is fair, I am not contesting that, more asking for information on how to appropriately prioritize. We should have clear defined boundaries, however slight overlap isn't a bad thing at all. Shane is currently OOF, we should give him the benefit of the doubt this comment was missed? @shaneutt if you could address the concern from @danwinship? In the interest of transparency lets keep all conversations related to this PR here.

## Roles and Organization Management

This working group adheres to the Roles and Organization Management outlined in
[wg-governance] and opts-in to updates and modifications to [wg-governance].

## Exit Criteria

The WG is done if/when a shared recommendation is in place for how the Kubernetes
project should or should not integrate with these emergent systems.  This could
include a recommendation for Kubernetes to adopt and/or evolve tools (e.g. MCP
connectors, benchmark or environment validation tooling, etc.) and evolve its

> own governance model to provide proper stewardship within the project (new SIG or

Author: fixed, thanks!

>  own governance model to provide proper stewardship within the project (new SIG or integration with existing SIGs).

Author: Fixed, thanks!

ecosystems could link to the outputs of this WG as a trusted vehicle for
supporting AI integrations with Kubernetes.

### In scope

* Develop a shared community point of view and associated best practices
enabling AI agent (or multi-agent) systems to integrate with Kubernetes.

* Provide a forum for intersecting code experimentation in AI integration
space and discussion with the existing Kubernetes community.

* Recommend an appropriate go forward governance model for AI Integrations
with the Kubernetes project or totally external
to Kubernetes.

* Identify appropriate auth(z) patterns for AI connector identities, its
 closest caller, and Kubernetes RBAC.

* Defining benchmarks on pros/cons of design approaches to meet user outcomes.

* Ensure security, observability, and policy enforcement can be consistently
applied across integrated systems (K8s and external Control Planes such as
LLMs) and AI integration applications.

* Define potential enhancements to API conventions to scale AI integration
patterns that respect data privacy and safety concerns during our design
process. Consider alternative API patterns that could be a better fit for
AI enablement.

> * Explore patterns for efficient network access to emergent protocols such

Reviewer: Thank you, I've seen that, but still missed it :sweat_smile:

README] and uses the Roles and Organization Management outlined in
[wg-governance].

## Scope

The AI Integration Working Group focuses on enabling seamless integration of
AI/ML control planes with Kubernetes, as well as providing standardized
patterns for deploying, managing, and operating AI applications at scale
on Kubernetes.

The Working Group will provide a forum for a broad engineering community to
give feedback to the project on challenges encountered when integrating with
Kubernetes.

This addresses a broad need with many end-users deploying complex AI systems,
AI/ML platform providers, Kubernetes distributions, and developers of
distributed AI applications facing these integration challenges. Standardizing
solutions in this space benefits the entire Kubernetes ecosystem. Adjacent
ecosystems could link to the outputs of this WG as a trusted vehicle for
supporting AI integrations with Kubernetes.

### In scope

* Develop a shared community point of view and associated best practices
enabling AI agent (or multi-agent) systems to integrate with Kubernetes.

* Provide a forum for intersecting code experimentation in AI integration

> space (to be provided externally of Kubernetes via LF/CNCF) and discussion

Reviewer: Why do we need that separate from k8s? We have kubernetes-sigs, where several other SIGs/WGs are experimenting, don't we?

Author: Absolutely open to a repo in kubernetes-sigs for experimentation. Updated.

with the existing Kubernetes community.

* Recommend an appropriate go forward governance model for AI Integrations
with the Kubernetes project or totally external

> to Kubernetes.

Reviewer: Again, why external? What's wrong with being part of k8s?

Author: Updated.
